Quantum mechanics is the fundamental physical theory that describes the behavior of matter and of light. Its unusual characteristics typically occur at and below the scale of atoms. It is the foundation of all quantum physics, which includes quantum chemistry, quantum biology, quantum field theory, quantum technology, and quantum information science. Quantum mechanics can describe many systems that classical physics cannot.
Quantum systems have bound states that are quantized to discrete values of energy, momentum, angular momentum, and other quantities, in contrast to classical systems where these quantities can be measured continuously. Measurements of quantum systems show characteristics of both particles and waves, and there are limits to how accurately the value of a physical quantity can be predicted prior to its measurement, given a complete set of initial conditions.
Quantum mechanics arose gradually from theories to explain observations that could not be reconciled with classical physics, such as Max Planck's solution in 1900 to the black-body radiation problem, and the correspondence between energy and frequency in Albert Einstein's 1905 paper, which explained the photoelectric effect. These early attempts to understand microscopic phenomena led to the full development of quantum mechanics in the mid-1920s by Niels Bohr, Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, Paul Dirac and others.
A fundamental feature of the theory is that it usually cannot predict with certainty what will happen, but only gives probabilities. One consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is a tradeoff in predictability between measurable quantities. The most famous form of this uncertainty principle says that it is impossible to have a precise prediction for a measurement of position and also at the same time for a measurement of momentum.
Another consequence is the phenomenon of quantum interference, often illustrated with the double-slit experiment. Another non-classical phenomenon is quantum tunnelling, where a particle that goes up against a potential barrier can cross it, even if its kinetic energy is smaller than the maximum of the potential. When quantum systems interact, the result can be the creation of quantum entanglement, where their properties become so intertwined that a description of the whole solely in terms of the individual parts is no longer possible.