Evolution is the change in the heritable characteristics of biological populations over successive generations. It occurs when evolutionary processes such as genetic drift and natural selection act on genetic variation, resulting in certain characteristics becoming more or less common within a population. The process of evolution has given rise to biodiversity at every level of biological organisation.
The scientific theory of evolution by natural selection was conceived independently by two British naturalists, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace, in the mid-nineteenth century as an explanation for why organisms are adapted to their physical and biological environments. The theory was first set out in detail in Darwin's book On the Origin of Species. Natural selection is the differential survival and reproduction of individuals due to differences in the relative fitness endowed on them by their own particular complement of observable characteristics.
Darwin thought of natural selection by analogy to how farmers select crops or livestock for breeding, which he called artificial selection. He defined natural selection as the principle by which each slight variation of a trait, if useful, is preserved. Several philosophers of the classical era, including Empedocles and his intellectual successor, the Roman poet Lucretius, expressed the idea that nature produces a huge variety of creatures randomly, and that only those creatures that manage to provide for themselves and reproduce successfully persist.
The processes that change DNA in a population include natural selection, genetic drift, mutation, and gene flow. All life on Earth shares a last universal common ancestor, which lived approximately three and a half to three point eight billion years ago. The fossil record includes a progression from early biogenic graphite to microbial mat fossils to fossilised multicellular organisms. Existing patterns of biodiversity have been shaped by repeated formations of new species, changes within species, and loss of species throughout the evolutionary history of life on Earth.
In natural selection, genetic mutations that are beneficial to an individual's survival are passed on through reproduction. This results in a new generation of organisms that are more likely to survive to reproduce. For example, evolving long necks has enabled giraffes to feed on leaves that others cannot reach, giving them a competitive advantage. Those with shorter necks and access to less food would be less likely to survive to pass on their genes.