Sir Isaac Newton was an English polymath who was a mathematician, physicist, astronomer, alchemist, theologian, author and inventor. He was a key figure in the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment that followed. His book Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, first published in 1687, achieved the first great unification in physics and established classical mechanics. Newton also made seminal contributions to optics, and shares credit with the German mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz for formulating infinitesimal calculus, although he developed calculus years before Leibniz.
Newton was born on 25 December 1642 at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire, England. His father, also named Isaac Newton, died three months before his birth. When Newton was three, his mother remarried and went to live with her new husband, the Reverend Barnabas Smith, leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough. The young Isaac disliked his stepfather and held some enmity towards his mother for marrying him.
He was self-taught in mathematics and did his research without help. His work De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas was identified as the work of an extraordinary genius and proficiency. Newton later became involved in a dispute with the German polymath Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz over priority in the development of calculus. Both are now credited with independently developing calculus, though with very different mathematical notations.
In 1664, while still a student, Newton read recent work on optics and light by the English physicists Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke. He investigated the refraction of light by a glass prism and discovered measurable, mathematical patterns in the phenomenon of colour. He found white light to be a mixture of infinitely varied coloured rays, each ray definable by the angle through which it is refracted on entering or leaving a given transparent medium. He correlated this notion with his study of the interference colours of thin films.
Newton built the first practical reflecting telescope in 1668. He also developed a theory of light based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the colors of the rainbow. According to the well-known story, it was on seeing an apple fall in his orchard at some time during 1665 or 1666 that Newton conceived that the same force governed the motion of the Moon and the apple. He calculated the force needed to hold the Moon in its orbit, as compared with the force pulling an object to the ground.
His three laws of motion, the basic principles of modern physics, resulted in the formulation of the law of universal gravitation. Newton's work on gravity was ultimately well received, particularly in England, and he was made a fellow of Trinity College in 1687. From 1688, Newton became ambitious to forge a political career. In 1696 he was made the warden of the royal mint in the Tower of London. In 1703, he was elected President of the Royal Society. Newton was knighted by Queen Anne in 1705. Isaac Newton died on 31 March 1727 in London, England, and is buried in Westminster Abbey.