Plate tectonics is the scientific theory that Earth's lithosphere comprises a number of large tectonic plates, which have been slowly moving since three to four billion years ago. The model builds on the concept of continental drift, an idea developed during the first decades of the twentieth century. Plate tectonics came to be accepted by geoscientists after seafloor spreading was validated in the mid to late 1960s.
The location where two plates meet is called a plate boundary. Plate boundaries are where geological events occur, such as earthquakes and the creation of topographic features such as mountains, volcanoes, mid-ocean ridges, and oceanic trenches. The vast majority of the world's active volcanoes occur along plate boundaries. Tectonic plates may include continental crust or oceanic crust, or both.
In 1912, the meteorologist Alfred Wegener described what he called continental drift. His ideas were not taken seriously by many geologists, who pointed out that there was no apparent mechanism for continental drift. Wegener's vindication did not come until after his death in 1930. In 1947, a team of scientists confirmed the existence of a rise in the central Atlantic Ocean and found that the floor of the seabed beneath the layer of sediments consisted of basalt, not the granite which is the main constituent of continents.
Harry Hammond Hess studied the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and proposed that hot molten rock was added to the crust at the ridge and expanded the seafloor outward. This theory became known as seafloor spreading. Since the Earth's circumference has not changed over geologic time, Hess concluded that older seafloor has to be consumed somewhere else, and suggested that this process takes place at oceanic trenches.
Subduction is a geological process in which the oceanic lithosphere and some continental lithosphere is recycled into the Earth's mantle at the convergent boundaries between tectonic plates. The process of subduction has created most of the Earth's continental crust. Rates of subduction are typically measured in centimeters per year, with rates of convergence as high as eleven centimeters per year.